==========
tagtool.py
==========

The **tagtool.py** example program can be used to read or write NFC
Forum Tags. For some tags, currently Type 3 Tags only, **tagtool** can
also be used to format for NDEF use. ::

  $ tagtool.py [-h|--help] [options] command

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

Options
=======

.. program:: tagtool.py

.. include:: cli-general-options.txt
.. include:: cli-reader-options.txt
.. include:: cli-debug-options.txt
.. include:: cli-device-options.txt

.. option:: -p PASSWORD

   Use PASSWORD to authentication with a tag that supports password
   protection. This would be the same password as used in
   :option:`tagtool.py protect -p` to set a password.

Commands
========

Available commands are listed below. The default if no command is
specified is to invoke **tagtool.py show**.

show
----

The **show** command prints information about a tag, including NDEF
data if present.::

  $ tagtool.py [options] show [-h] [-v]

.. program:: tagtool.py show

.. option:: -v

   Print verbose information about the tag found. The amount of
   additional information depends on the tag type. 

dump
----

The **dump** command dumps tag data to the console or into a
file. Data written to the console is a hexadecimal string. Data
written to a file is raw bytes. ::

  $ tagtool.py [options] dump [-h] [-o FILE]

.. program:: tagtool.py dump

.. option:: -o FILE

   Write data to FILE. Data format is plain bytes.

load
----

The **load** command writes data to a tag. Data may be plain bytes or
a hex string, as generated by the **dump** command or with the
**ndeftool**. ::

  $ tagtool.py [options] load [-h] FILE

.. program:: tagtool.py load

.. option:: FILE

   Load NDEF data to write from **FILE** which must exist and be
   readable. The file may contain NDEF data in either raw bytes or a
   hexadecimal string which gets converted to bytes. If **FILE** is
   specified as a single dash ``-`` data is read from **stdin**.

format
------

The **format** command writes NDEF capability information for an empty
NDEF memory area on NFC Forum compliant tags. A tag type may be
specified to give further options. ::

  $ tagtool.py [options] format [-h] [options] {tt1,tt2,tt3,tt4} ...

.. option:: --version x.y

   The format of the management information that describes the NDEF
   data area on the tag, as defined in the NFC Forum tag
   specifications. Only defined version numbers are acceptable. The
   version must be expressed as a version string of the form
   ``<major>.<minor>``, where each component is an integer between 0
   and 15, inclusively. For example, ``--version 1.3`` denotes major
   version 1 and minor version 3. If ``--version`` is not provided,
   the highest possible version number is used.

.. option:: --wipe BYTE

   When formatting a tag the NDEF message data itself is usually not
   touched and could be easily recovered. The ``--wipe`` options
   instructs the formatter to overwrite the complete data area with
   the given 8-bit integer value. Depending on the tag type and size
   this may take a couple of seconds.
   
format tt1
^^^^^^^^^^

The **format tt1** command formats the NDEF partition on a Type 1
Tag. ::

  $ tagtool.py [options] format tt1 [-h]

.. program:: tagtool.py format tt1

.. option:: --magic BYTE

   The value to use as the NDEF magic byte. This option can be used to
   set an invalid magic byte.

.. option:: --ver x.y

   Type 1 Tag NDEF mapping version number, specified as a version
   string in the same way as for to the `--version` argument. The
   difference is that this version number will be written regardless
   of whether it constitutes a valid version number.

.. option:: --tms BYTE

   Value to write into the tag memory size byte.

.. option:: --rwa BYTE

   Value to write into the read/write access byte.

format tt2
^^^^^^^^^^

The **format tt2** command formats the NDEF partition on a Type 2
Tag. ::

  $ tagtool.py [options] format tt2 [-h]

.. program:: tagtool.py format tt2

format tt3
^^^^^^^^^^

The **format tt3** command formats the NDEF partition on a Type 3
Tag. With no additional options it does format for the maximum
capacity. With further options it is possible to create any kind of
weird tag formats for testing reader implementations. Note that none
of these options is verified, except for the possible value range to
fit the destination field. None of the options is necessary to
create a correct format. ::

  $ tagtool.py [options] format tt3 [-h] [--ver STR] [--nbr INT] [--nbw INT]
                                    [--max INT] [--rfu INT] [--wf INT]
                                    [--rw INT] [--len INT] [--crc INT]

.. program:: tagtool.py format tt3

.. option:: --ver x.y

   Type 3 Tag NDEF mapping version number, specified as a version
   string in the same way as for to the `--version` argument. The
   difference is that this version number will be written regardless
   of whether it constitutes a valid version number.

.. option:: --nbr N

   Type 3 Tag attribute block *Nbr* field value, the number of blocks
   that can be read at once.  Must be an 8-bit integer in decimal or
   hexadecimal notation.

.. option:: --nbw N

   Type 3 Tag attribute block *Nbw* field value, the number of blocks
   that can be written at once.  Must be an 8-bit integer in decimal
   or hexadecimal notation.

.. option:: --max N

   Type 3 Tag attribute block *Nmaxb* field value, which is the
   maximum number of blocks available for NDEF data.  Must be a 16-bit
   integer in decimal or hexadecimal notation.

.. option:: --rfu N

   Type 3 Tag attribute block *reserved* field value. Must be an 8-bit
   integer in decimal or hexadecimal notation.

.. option:: --wf N

   Type 3 Tag attribute block *WriteF* field value. Must be an 8-bit
   integer in decimal or hexadecimal notation.

.. option:: --rw N

   Type 3 Tag attribute block *RW Flag* field value. Must be an 8-bit
   integer in decimal or hexadecimal notation.

.. option:: --len N

   Type 3 Tag attribute block *Ln* field value that specifies the
   actual size of the NDEF data stored. Must be a 24-bit integer in
   decimal or hexadecimal notation.

.. option:: --crc N

   Type 3 Tag attribute block *Checksum* field value. Must be a 16-bit
   integer in decimal or hexadecimal notation. If not specified, the
   checksum is computed to be correct.

format tt4
^^^^^^^^^^

The **format tt4** command formats the NDEF partition on a Type 4
Tag. ::

  $ tagtool.py [options] format tt4 [-h]

.. program:: tagtool.py format tt4

protect
-------

The **protect** command attempts to protect the tag against write
modifications, optionally also against unauthorized read
access. Support for protection depends on the tag type and
product. Without options the the default attempt is protect with lock
bits, be warned that this can not be undone. Lock bits are only
available for type 1 and type 2 tags. With option ``-p`` the
protection will be based on a password and further modifications are
possible for anyone in posession of the password. Password protection
works on NXP NTAG 21x type 2 tags and Sony FeliCa Lite-S type 3
tags. ::

  $ tagtool.py protect [-h] [-p PASSWORD] [--from BLOCK] [--unreadable]

.. program:: tagtool.py protect

.. option:: -p PASSWORD

   Protect the tag with the given PASSWORD. This works only for the
   NXP NTAG 21x type 2 tags and Sony FeliCa Lite-S type 3 tags. The
   password string is used as a key to compute an HMAC-SHA256 with the
   tag identifier (UID or IDm) as the message. The final password is
   the leftmost number of octets as needed for the tag product, 6
   octets for an NTAG 21x and 16 octets for a FeliCa Lite-S. A
   password protected tag can then be unlocked with
   :option:`tagtool.py -p`. ::

      $ tagtool.py protect -p "my secret password"
      $ tagtool.py -p "my secret password" protect -p "new secret"

.. option:: --from BLOCK

   Start protecting data from a given block number. This option does
   only make sense on tags that organize memory in blocks or pages
   (Type 1, 2 and 3 Tags). A block corresponds to 4 byte of memory (a
   page) on Type 1 and 2 Tags, and 16 byte of memory on Type 3
   Tags. If the tag has fewer blocks than specified, the value is
   silently adjusted to the largest possible.

.. option:: --unreadable

   This option can only be used with password based protection. The
   result is that the tag will become unreadable without a password,
   i.e. the content is completely hidden. Further reads must then use
   the password option before the command. ::

     $ tagtool.py -p "secret password" show

emulate
-------

The **emulate** command emulates an NDEF tag if the hardware and
driver support that functionality. The tag type must be specified
following the optional parameters. The only currently supported tag
type it **tt3**. ::

  $ tagtool.py emulate [-h] [-l] [-k] [-s SIZE] [-p FILE] [FILE] {tt3} ...

.. program:: tagtool.py emulate

.. option:: FILE

   Initialize the tag with NDEF data read from **FILE**. If not
   specified the tag will be just empty.

.. option:: -l, --loop

   Automatically restart after the tag has been released by the Initiator.

.. option:: -k, --keep

   If the ``--loop`` option is set, keep the same memory content
   after tag relase for the next tag activation. Without the ``-k``
   option the tag memory is initialized from the command options for
   every activation.

.. option:: -s SIZE

   The minimum size for NDEF data. Depending on the tag type this may
   be rounded up to the nearest multiple of the tag storage
   granularity. If NDEF data is provided the size may be adjusted to
   fit the length of the data.

.. option:: -p FILE

   Preserve memory content in **FILE** after the tag is relased by the
   Initiator. The file is created if it does not exist and otherwise
   overwritten.

emulate tt3
^^^^^^^^^^^

The **emulate tt3** command emulates an NFC Forum Type 3 Tag. ::

  $ tagtool.py [options] emulate [options] tt3 [-h] [--idm HEX] [--pmm HEX]
                                               [--sys HEX] [--bitrate {212,424}]

.. program:: tagtool.py format

.. option:: --idm HEX

   The Manufacture Identifier to use in the polling response. Specified
   as a hexadecimal string. Defaults to ``03FEFFE011223344``.

.. option:: --pmm HEX

   The Manufacture Parameter to use in the polling response. Specified
   as a hexadecimal string. Defaults to ``01E0000000FFFF00``.

.. option:: --sys HEX, --sc HEX

   The system code use in the polling response if requested. Specified
   as a hexadecimal string. Defaults to ``12FC``.

.. option:: --bitrate {212,424}

   The bitrate to listen for and respond with. Must be either 212
   or 424. Defaults to 212 kbps.

Examples
========

Copy NDEF from one tag to another::

  $ tagtool.py dump -o /tmp/tag.ndef && tagtool load /tmp/tag.ndef

Copy NDEF from one tag to many others::

  $ tagtool.py dump -o /tmp/tag.ndef && tagtool --loop load /tmp/tag.ndef

